## Introduction

 * Hash tables provide fast insertion, deletion, and retrieval.
 * Hash tables perform poorly for searching, eg- finding the minimum and maximum values in a data set. 
 * For searching, finding the minimum and maximum values, binary search tree is more appropriate.

## An Overview of Hashing
 * The hash table data structure is designed around an array. 
 * Each data element is stored in the array based on an associated data element called the key (generated by hash function).
 * The goal of the hash function is to attempt to distribute the keys as evenly as possible among the elements of the array.
 * Even with an efficient hash function, it is possible for two keys to hash (the result of the hash function) to the same  value. This is   called a collision, and we need a strategy for handling collisions when they occur.

> The last thing we have to determine when creating a hash function is how large an array to create for the hash table. One constraint usually placed on the array size is that it should be a prime number.

## A Hash Table Class
We need a class to represent the hash table. The class will include functions for com‐ puting hash values, a function for inserting data into the hash table, a function for retrieving data from the hash table, and a function for displaying the distribution of data in the hash table, as well as various utility functions we might need.
Here is the constructor function for our HashTable class:

```javascript
function HashTable() { 
 this.table = new Array(137); 
 this.simpleHash = simpleHash; 
 this.showDistro = showDistro;                 
 this.put = put;
 //this.get = get;
}
```
          
The get() function is commented out for now; we’ll describe its definition later in the chapter.

## Choosing a Hash Function

The choice of a hash function depends on the data type of the key. If your key is an integer, then the simplest hash function is to return the key modulo the size of the array. There are circumstances when this function is not recommended, such as when the keys all end in 0 and the array size is 10. This is one reason the array size should always be a prime number, such as 137, which is the value we used in the preceding constructor
function. Also, if the keys are random integers, then the hash function should more evenly distribute the keys. This type of hashing is known as modular hashing.

In many applications, the keys are strings. Choosing a hash function to work with string keys proves to be more difficult and should be chosen carefully.

A simple hash function that at first glance seems to work well is to sum the ASCII value of the letters in the key. The hash value is then that sum modulo the array size. Here is the definition for this simple hash function:
```javascipt
function simpleHash(data) {
 var total = 0;
 for (var i = 0; i < data.length; ++i) {
           total += data.charCodeAt(i);
 }
 return total % this.table.length; 
}
```
We can finish up this first attempt at the HashTable class with definitions for put() and showDistro(), which place the data in the hash table and display the data from the hash table respectively. Here is the complete class definition:
```javascipt
function HashTable() { 
 this.table = new Array(137); 
 this.simpleHash = simpleHash; 
 this.showDistro = showDistro; 
 this.put = put;
 //this.get = get;
}

function put(data) {
 var pos = this.simpleHash(data); 
 this.table[pos] = data;
}

function simpleHash(data) {
 var total = 0;
 for (var i = 0; i < data.length; ++i) {
          total += data.charCodeAt(i);
 }
 return total % this.table.length; 
}

function showDistro() { varn=0;
 for (var i = 0; i < this.table.length; ++i) { 
  if (this.table[i] != undefined) {
   print(i + ": " + this.table[i]); 
  }
 } 
}
```
Example 8-1 demonstrates how the simpleHash() function works. Example 8-1. Hashing using a simple hash function
load("HashTable.js");
```javascipt
var someNames = ["David", "Jennifer", "Donnie", "Raymond", "Cynthia", "Mike", "Clayton", "Danny", "Jonathan"]; 
var hTable = new HashTable();
for (var i = 0; i < someNames.length; ++i) { 
 hTable.put(someNames[i]);
}
hTable.showDistro();
```
Here is the output from Example 8-1:
   * 35: Cynthia
   * 45: Clayton
   * 57: Donnie
   * 77: David
   * 95: Danny
   * 116: Mike
   * 132: Jennifer
   * 134: Jonathan
    
The simpleHash() function computes a hash value by summing the ASCII value of each name using the JavaScript function charCodeAt() to return a character’s ASCII value. The put() function receives the array index value from the simpleHash() function and stores the data element in that position. The showDistro() function displays where the names are actually placed into the array using the hash function. As you can see, the data is not particularly evenly distributed. The names are bunched up at the beginning and at the end of the array.
There is an even bigger problem than just the uneven distribution of names in the array, however. If you pay close attention to the output, you’ll see that not all the names in the original array of names are displayed. Let’s investigate further by adding a print() statement to the simpleHash() function:
```javascipt
function simpleHash(data) {
var total = 0;
for (var i = 0; i < data.length; ++i) {
          total += data.charCodeAt(i);
       }
       print("Hash value: " + data + " -> " + total);
return total % this.table.length; }
```
When we run the program again, we see the following output:
    Hash value: David -> 488
    
    Hash value: Jennifer -> 817
    
    Hash value: Donnie -> 605
    Hash value: Raymond -> 730
    Hash value: Cynthia -> 720
    Hash value: Mike -> 390
    Hash value: Clayton -> 730
    Hash value: Danny -> 506
    Hash value: Jonathan -> 819
    35: Cynthia
    45: Clayton
    57: Donnie
    77: David
    95: Danny
    116: Mike
    132: Jennifer
    134: Jonathan
    
The problem is now apparent—the strings "Clayton" and "Raymond" hash to the same value, causing a collision. Because of the collision, only "Clayton" is stored in the hash table. We can improve our hash function to avoid such collisions, as discussed in the next section.

## A Better Hash Function

To avoid collisions, you first need to make sure the array you are using for the hash table is sized to a prime number. This is necessary due to the use of modular arithmetic in computing the key. The size of the array needs to be greater than 100 in order to more evenly disperse the keys in the table. Through experimentation, we found that the first prime number greater than 100 that didn’t cause collisions for the data set used in Example 8-1 is 137. When smaller prime numbers close to 100 were used, there were still collisions in the data set.

After properly sizing the hash table, the next step to avoiding hashing collisions is to compute a better hash value. An algorithm known as Horner’s method does the trick. Without getting too deep into the mathematics of the algorithm, our new hash function still works by summing the ASCII values of the characters of a string, but it adds a step by multiplying the resulting total by a prime constant. Most algorithm textbooks suggest a small prime number, such as 31, but for our set of names 31 didn’t work; however, 37 worked without causing collisions.

We now present a new, better hash function utilizing Horner’s method:
```javascript
function betterHash(string, arr) {
const H = 37;
var total = 0;
for (var i = 0; i < string.length; ++i) {
          total += H * total + string.charCodeAt(i);
       }
       total = total % arr.length;
return parseInt(total); 
}
```

Example 8-2 contains the current definition of the HashTable class. Example 8-2. The HashTable class with the betterHash() 
```javascript
function
function HashTable() { this.table = new Array(137); this.simpleHash = simpleHash; this.betterHash = betterHash; this.showDistro = showDistro; this.put = put;
//this.get = get;
}
function put(data) {
var pos = this.betterHash(data); this.table[pos] = data;
}
function simpleHash(data) {
var total = 0;
for (var i = 0; i < data.length; ++i) {
      total += data.charCodeAt(i);
   }
   print("Hash value: " + data + " -> " + total);
return total % this.table.length; }
function showDistro() { varn=0;
for (var i = 0; i < this.table.length; ++i) { if (this.table[i] != undefined) {
print(i + ": " + this.table[i]); }
} }
function betterHash(string) {
const H = 37;
var total = 0;
for (var i = 0; i < string.length; ++i) {
      total += H * total + string.charCodeAt(i);
   }
total = total % this.table.length; if(total<0){
total += this.table.length-1; }
return parseInt(total); }
```
Notice that the put() function is now using betterHash() rather than simpleHash(). The program in Example 8-3 tests our new hash function.

Example 8-3. Testing the betterHash() function
load("HashTable.js");
```javascript
var someNames = ["David", "Jennifer", "Donnie", "Raymond",
"Cynthia", "Mike", "Clayton", "Danny", "Jonathan"]; var hTable = new HashTable();
for (var i = 0; i < someNames.length; ++i) { hTable.put(someNames[i]);
}
htable.showDistro();
```
The result of running this program is:
    17: Cynthia
    25: Donnie
    30: Mike
    33: Jennifer
    37: Jonathan
    57: Clayton
    65: David
    66: Danny
    99: Raymond
All nine names are now present and accounted for.

